# libgit2-d

`@safe` D bindings for libgit2.

## Maintainers' notes

This is an incomplete binding, meaning we polish it as we use it. Right now, you
may use the binding directly if you're fine with writing non-safe functions or
breaking `dip1000`. Note that the functions themselves are marked as `@safe`;
it's just that some function parameters are simply un-obtainable in an `@safe`
context (e.g. cannot take address of local variable or a pointer to a pointer).
By polishing, we modify the function signatures and add attributes according to
the rules outlined in the [Making It Ergonomic](#Making-It-Ergonomic) section
so that they can be used smoothly in Safe-D.

### Generating Bindings

This shouldn't be required. When updating the bindings to new versions, consult
[Updating Bindings](#Updating-Bindings) section. If you really need to generate
the bindings, build the libgit2 subproject using CMake, install it to a local
directory, use `clang` (NOT `gcc`!) to preprocess the header file `git2.h` to
`git2.i`, and lastly run [`dstep`](https://github.com/jacob-carlborg/dstep) on
it.

```bash
cmake -DBUILD_TESTS=OFF -B build -S .
make -C build
DESTDIR="$PWD/install" make -C build install
clang -E -I$PWD/install/usr/local/include $PWD/install/usr/local/include/git2.h -o source/git2/git2.i
dstep source/git2/git2.i -o source/git2/bindings.d
```

### Updating Bindings

Thankfully the maintainers of [libgit2](https://github.com/libgit2/libgit2) have
been doing a tremendous job of keeping their changelog detailed. In addition,
libgit2 rarely makes huge changes in its public API. Therefore, once we have the
initial generated bindings, we can simply update the bindings by hand according
to either the changelog or the diffs between tags generated by GitHub.

When hand-authoring these new functions/structs, you may consult the existing
generated bindings as a reference.

If the new API is a completely new header file, you can use `dstep` to process
that single header file (without preprocessing) after performing the build and
install steps specified in the [Generating Bindings](#Generating-Bindings)
section.

### Making It Ergonomic

1. At the very least, all pointer parameters should have the `scope` attribute
   except for
   `const(char)*`-type parameters, where we're expected to pass a string using
   `someString.toStringz()`. If you're only adding a `scope` attribute, you may
   just edit it in the `bindings.d` file.
2. If a parameter is passed to be assigned (e.g. `git_clone`,
   `git_remote_lookup`), use the `scope out` attribute instead. You can
   usually infer this through the API documentation or the paramter (e.g.
   an `out**`). If you're only replacing a pointer-to-pointer with a
   `scope out` pointer parameter, you may just edit it in the `bindings.d` file.
3. All pointer parameters should be replaced with `scope ref` as much as
   possible. This primarily applies
   to structs that have a declared body (such as all structs with the form
   `git_x_options`). If you're only replacing a pointer with `scope ref`, you
   may just edit it in the `bindings.d` file. However, note for exceptions as
   outlined in the rule below.
   - The `git_x_options` structs are particularly forgiving in that there are
     two identical functions for initializing them
     (`git_x_init_options` and `git_x_options_init`). In this case, we choose
     to exempt the `git_x_options_init` functions from rule (3) and only apply
     rule (3) on the `git_x_init_options` functions).
4. Some structs, particularly structs who do not have a declared body and are
   assigned through a pointer-to-pointer or a ref to a pointer (such as
   `git_repository` and `git_remote`), cannot be passed as `ref` since they must
   be declared as a pointer. In these cases, ignore rule (3) and follow rule
   (1).
5. Anything with `ref`/`out` disallows passing lvalues to it, therefore rule (3)
   will break any function that intends you to pass `null` to indicate an
   optional parameter. When this happens, copy the edited function into the
   `extra.d` file and follow rule (1) for that parameter. For the original
   function in the
   `bindings.d` file, you may add a `=null` default value to that parameter if
   desired. For reference, search for the definition
   of the two `git_clone` functions.

On the ABI level, the signature of the functions are not changed. This is
only for the purpose of satisfying the compiler and adhereing to Safe-D.
(If you're wondering why we can't use the `in` attribute, this is because
with `--preview=in`, `in` is not allowed in `extern(C)` functions)

